>> Hello.
I'm Chantal Westerman.
One of the best parts of
"The Wisdom Workshops"
are the up close and
personal conversations
with the leading
practitioners and authors
in the holistic field.
This gives all of
us an opportunity
to know these people
just a little bit better.
So join me as they share
their wisdom with us.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Nick, having read both your
books, particularly your most
recent one, "In God's
Truth," it occurs to me
that the messages of, I guess
it would be 2,000 years ago,
are the same messages
that we're hearing today.
Is that true?
>> That is true.
In my case, that's a
commitment I've made.
In the 4th century AD the
messages of Jesus and Paul
of 2,000 years ago
were distorted.
Messages of love were
changed to messages of fear.
Messages of compassion were
changed to messages of guilt.
And messages that were
supposed to bring us together
in brotherly and sisterly
love, [INAUDIBLE]
were unfortunately changed,
which, in many cases,
polarized people, and created
prejudice and bigotry.
And today we're bringing
those messages back again.
>> What is it that allowed us?
I mean, gratefully,
they're back.
Because compassion and love
are so universally important.
>> Yes.
>> But what changed?
What is changing, I should
say, because I don't
think it's changed completely.
But there's a shift.
>> I believe there's a spiritual
consciousness that is spreading
throughout the
United States today,
as well as the
rest of the world,
like never before in
the history of mankind.
Our minds are the gateways
to our hearts and soul.
And more and more people
have opened up those gates,
allowing information to come
into the hearts and souls
that four or five years ago
they couldn't have done.
>> "The Messengers"
was wildly successful.
If you had written that book,
let's say, 10 years ago, would
it have been as successful.
>> No.
Not even five years ago.
And you can just see this in the
makeup of the audiences, where
six or seven years
ago the audience
would almost all be female.
It would have been more what
we would describe as a new age
audience.
But today it's a
cross-section of America.
We have people not only
of the different genders,
but from the different
walks of life.
I believe the bridge between
mainstream and new age
is so small now that you
can't even distinguish it.
>> "In God's Truth" paints a
very interesting image of God.
Because we all tend to have
a particular image of him.
>> Yes.
>> Kind of fire and brimstone
in some people's eyes.
>> You talk about who is God.
>> Well, in
traditional religion,
coming from the Old Testament,
Isaiah described God
as an elderly man with a white
beard, and long white hair,
with a gown, with a long
robe sitting on a throne.
But what if God
didn't have a beard?
And what if God instead
had lipstick because God
was a woman.
But in reality,
you can't see God.
We can only experience God.
We experience God in
the beautiful sunrises
in the Phoenix
Valley, or the sunsets
along the Western
shores of Hawaii,
in the multicolored
beautiful faces
of the people that walk along
the crowded streets of downtown
New York, or London, or
Rome, or San Francisco.
So in reality, we only
can experience God.
And everything that we
feel and hear that's good,
rather than actually
have an image
of a physical person as God.
>> I'd love to hear you
speak more about the people
at the Whole Life expos.
Because you could lecture
all over the place
if you wanted to.
And yet, you're here.
And the audience here
is fascinated with you.
What do you get when you
come to Whole Life Expo?
>> Well, first of all, I think
it starts with the people who
represent Whole Life
Expo, the staff.
And there's a genuine
love, and friendship,
and wanting to share the
spirituality that we all
have inside of us with people
all around the country.
So this, to me,
is very important.
And I feel that when I'm working
with the Whole Life Expo.
And that's why I've chosen
Whole Life, as opposed
to other expos.
But also the audiences.
The audiences truly
are an audience
that are coming to
want to understand
their relationship with
God, as well as to enhance
their own spirituality.
And that's the
commitment, I believe,
that Whole Life Expo, as
well as myself has made.
>> I want to talk a little bit
about your creative process.
Now, I talked to you a long
time ago about "The Messengers."
And it was fascinating,
because you were not
writing it from your head.
It was somebody else speaking to
you, and through you, and even
through your arms you wrote.
>> Right.
>> Did the same thing happen
with "In God's Truth?"
>> Yes.
It's interesting.
I wrote "In God's Truth"
in longhand with a pen.
>> You did?
How time consuming is that?
>> Well, I found that it was
totally different when I tried
to dictate on a tape
machine, or on a computer.
I was getting totally
different information.
And I truly believed
that I could
feel the energy changing with
every chapter I was writing.
And oftentimes, I wasn't
even aware of what
I was going to write next.
And I'd find myself saying,
wow, did I write that?
There's poetry in it.
And I'm not a poet.
And some of the poetry
is beautiful poetry.
And I don't even
know when I wrote it.
I found it in a drawer with my
handwriting on a piece of paper
with my pen and didn't
have a date on it.
So I honestly believe that I
got a tremendous number of help
from a number of
different co-authors
in different chapters.
>> So then it wasn't a
situation where you would get up
in the morning, and have
a cup of coffee, and say,
I'm going to write
from 9:00 to 1:00?
>> No.
I found that I could
literally put myself
in a position of
privacy, whether it
was in my home or my office,
and focus my attention,
and write an entire
chapter, almost
without requiring any changes
within a period of 20,
25 minutes.
>> And your publisher
wouldn't say, OK, Nick,
this didn't work?
This sentence.
It was just as it was?
>> There were no changes made
in publishing other than some
grammar.
But there were no changes as
far as the messages that we're
trying to convey or the
manner in which they
were being conveyed.
>> Do you hear the beginnings
of other ideas rattling around
in your head?
Like when you complete a
book, when you completed
"The Messengers,"
certainly there must
have been something that
said, there's more to tell.
>> It's true that when
I finished writing "In
God's Truth," there were still
some additional things I wanted
to say.
But what I got, literally,
was the message from spirit,
saying, no, Nick.
Not now.
There are some
incredible experiences
you're going to have
over the next few months.
And wait til you've
had those experiences.
And then you'll know you're
ready to write another book.
>> So often I think
not the answers,
but the questions are what tell
us a great deal about people
these days.
I'm curious as to the
questions that people ask you,
like after you lecture.
What do people want to know?
>> The thing that I found--
and I didn't anticipate this.
I did not realize this when
I first made the commitment
to cross that threshold
and do what I'm doing now
my life is the tremendous
number of people
who are searching
for and understanding
their relationship with
God who at one time
were involved in a religion
and fell out of their religion
because they could not take, any
longer, perhaps the punishing
God perspective, a place
called hell, guilt and sin.
And what I find, many people
come up to me afterwards.
Or we receive over
200 letters a week
in our office saying, thank
you for bringing me back
to a relationship with
God because of one
that they had lost earlier in
their life because of the way
God was being presented to them.
>> Had you had a relationship
with God and then lost
a relationship at any point in
your life, like in your youth?
I'm curious as to your path,
how you found your way here.
>> I went through a very
long period of time where I
didn't have religion.
And I still don't have one now.
But what I always had in my life
was a spiritual relationship
with God.
And there was a time when I
literally asked my guides, what
I call the messengers of God,
how come you've chosen me
for my mission.
I don't even have a religion.
And their response was,
well, Nick, what religion
do you think God is?
Do you think God is a
Mennonite, a Quaker, a Mormon?
God doesn't have
a religion either,
but embraces all
of his children,
and gives all of his
children his love.
So I think there's
something beyond religion.
If you think of religion as a
series of different buildings,
beyond religion is a thread.
There's threads that come out
of those buildings that connect
them with your spirituality.
>> Thank you so much, Nick.
Every time I talk to you
I have a greater insight
into my life and my God.
So I thank you
very much for that.
>> Well, I really
appreciate that, Chantal.
But I recognize, it's
not me that's important.
It's the messages that
you and I are sharing.
>> Yeah.
That's so true.
Thanks, Nick.
>> Thank you.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> What a pleasure it is
for me to talk to you as one
of my favorite
people in the world.
>> The feeling is mutual.
>> And how gracious you are
to come and speak with us just
before you are about to speak,
which is unusual for people.
So many people say,
not before I speak.
How do you feel before
you address a huge crowd?
And your crowd here is huge.
>> Well, I hope so.
>> Yeah.
It's big in Baltimore.
>> I don't normally do
anything before I speak either.
But anything called The
Wisdom Channel is just going
to get me tuned into wisdom.
So how do I feel before I speak?
I actually try to feel empty.
Because I don't
talk from my head.
I don't even actually
talk from my heart.
>> That's true.
>> I empty out and let
something else come through me.
So I really try to--
this sounds really
strange, but not prepare.
Now, this isn't 20 years ago.
But now.
Not prepare.
Not focus on it.
To just get in a very
open, receptive space
so I can get out
of the way, and let
myself develop a spontaneous
relationship with the audience,
and with wisdom.
And then be the link
between the two.
>> Now, here is something
that occurred to me.
When I look at
Whole Life Expos, I
think of them as very
spiritual gathering places.
You are known all over
the world, not just
the United States.
You are known all over the world
for your work in relationships.
Some people might say,
the two don't connect.
But I bet you disagree.
Spirituality and relationships.
>> Well, it's
actually very ironic.
My personal growth work
started when I was 18
and I became a
meditation teacher.
And until I was 30, and I
wasn't doing this career,
I was teaching meditation.
That was my beginning.
These were my roots.
I was doing like the first
Whole Life Expos back in God
knows when.
>> Really?
>> When they invented the wheel.
And then I happened to
write some books that
became bestsellers.
And they were very commercial.
And the interesting
thing is, this was back
in the early '80s.
Because I was
commercially successful
the new age movement
decided I wasn't spiritual.
And I became very
commercially successful,
and spoke to the
housewife in Nebraska,
who didn't know any
new age phraseology,
who didn't know what
the term new age meant,
who was just a typical American.
And I found a way
to talk to her,
to talk to the truck drivers, to
talk to the person who wouldn't
go to a Whole Life Expo.
That was my purpose.
That was my, as they
say in the east, Dharma.
I got that at a
very early point,
that I had the ability
to take concepts
that we might call spiritual,
and make them very, very
colloquial.
And so the challenge for me
has been to redefine myself
again as who I really am.
And people will come up to
me or interview me and say
things like, well,
gee, your latest book
is kind of spiritual.
Did you just get into this?
And I want to go,
don't you understand?
I've been doing
this since I was 18.
And so what's happened
in the last five
years is now that the big
audience knows who I am,
I'm able to bring them things
that I wasn't years ago.
And my next book
coming out in September
is, as I say, totally out
of the closet, spirituality
off the deep end.
And my publisher is thrilled.
But I wouldn't have been able
to get that book published
in a big way 10 years ago.
That just wasn't happening.
>> How do you account
for spirituality,
and these kinds of discussions
now being so mainstream.
What have we done that
we finally have said,
you know what,
let's consider this.
Let's consider these
alternative options.
>> Well, there's a huge, huge
transformation that's been
going on on the planet.
And it's been going
on for a long time.
And it started in the '60s.
And like anything, ideas start
with a core group of people
who are, perhaps, more free,
more open, more courageous,
and spread.
And as they reach people,
kind of like waves
when you drop
something in the water,
eventually the waves
reach everything.
The ideas that perhaps were new
age in the '70s, little fringe
in the '80s, now, again, you see
that same housewife in Nebraska
reading a book about angels,
and reading about a medium,
and doing Feng shui in her
house, and all kinds of things.
It's become pop culture, which
has its bad side as well.
But it's just a sign of the
evolution of the planet.
It was inevitable.
And like any growth
of consciousness,
it starts in one place.
And eventually what was on the
edge, becomes in the center.
>> And beyond that, it seems
to me that we are in need
of a healing.
We seem to be, a
lot of people, I
don't know if I
should say in pain.
>> We're out of balance.
We've been out of
balance for a long time.
We came out of society
post World War II,
where people finally
thought, OK, now we
can have the good life
that we couldn't have.
And the world is safe.
And so people began to acquire.
They began to accomplish.
You got the me generation.
You got the whole idea in the
'80s of acquiring more, better,
bigger.
And inevitably, as our
consciousness grows,
you get enough, and you do
enough, and you have enough,
and you realize that
it's not enough.
And it never will be enough.
And especially
people in their 30s,
40s, even early 50s suddenly
began to say, is this it?
Is this it?
I have my house.
I have the car.
I had the relationship.
But I'm not happy.
And that's where that
search for the inside
began in life, which I call
living from the inside out,
realizing that it's not what's
outside that makes us happy.
It's what's on the inside.
And so we have been
very out of balance.
And there's a return
that's happening.
And it's something
that's been predicted.
It's something that's exciting.
It's something
that's very healthy.
>> And since this is
definitely your field,
how does that manifest
in relationships?
Of course, basically
I think relationships
have been the same since
the beginning of time.
But there's something shifting.
>> No.
They're actually
very different now.
>> They are.
OK.
Then that's interesting.
>> My grandmother, my
great grandmother wanted
a relationship for stability.
The role of women was
in the background,
was to have children,
to support a man
so he could support the family.
And so my grandmother,
great grandmother never
would say to her
husband, you know,
I don't really feel like
we're connecting lately.
Or I feel like your female
side isn't coming out.
Because she needed him there.
There was no birth control.
There was no job opportunity.
For the first time
in the history
of the world, which is really a
sobering thought, we want more.
We want different.
We want better.
We want relationships
that are not
just there as a
social structure,
but in which we can
grow as a human being,
really evolve as a human being.
That puts a tremendous
pressure on relationships.
One of the things I've been
talking about and writing about
lately is the idea
that relationships
aren't particularly
meant to last
a lifetime if their purpose is
growth as opposed to stability.
See, if my purpose is to find
a husband, raise a family,
have two cars in the garage.
>> That's stability.
If my purpose is to grow
as a woman, and to learn,
perhaps the person I
meet at 20 isn't going
to be my growth partner at 45.
And if that's OK
with me, that may
look very different from
what my mother wanted
in a relationship.
There's a lot of people
out there in society
who are growing very,
very quickly, who've
been working on
their consciousness,
and are confused, because
their relationships
are successful in that they
got them to a certain place.
But they're not
successful in the old way,
which is that they
lasted until they died.
And so there's a lot of
people judging themselves
for having growth relationships.
And one thing I'm trying
to do is help people
understand that even
relationships now are going
to look very, very different.
>> You're so right.
Because people feel so guilty
when a relationship breaks up,
when there's a separation,
when there's a divorce.
People are fraught with guilt.
>> I have a wonderful psychic
friend who I go to periodically
to give me readings
about my life.
He's an amazing man.
And I went to him
recently as I was
going through a period
of tremendous change,
again, in my life.
Because we had this thought.
Well, I'll get through my
changes and settle down.
And settling down is not a
really conscious concept.
Life.
If you look at the universe,
it never settles down.
Nature never settles
down and says,
I think I'll skip the
seasons for two years.
Everything's always changing.
So we are always, if
we're in our natural mode,
we are going to always change
if we have the courage to do it.
So I went to him going, my god,
everything's upheaved again.
And he said, Barbara, when
you came into this life,
in the box that said, check
the kind of life you want,
you didn't check stability.
You checked growth.
And I knew when he
said it that I had.
>> Yes.
>> I had checked growth.
And growth and stability
are at odds with each other.
Because when there is
change, and growth is change,
that means what was has to die.
It has to transform.
So yeah.
Your friends who aren't into
anything new age, everyone
who's watching, may look
like they're happier.
You may even be embarrassed
to say to them, read this book
or take this workshop.
Cause they're thinking, hey,
your life doesn't look too hot.
>> Yeah.
Yeah.
>> So we have to really
not judge ourselves by what
our life looks like
on the outside,
but by what we're feeling
like, how we're growing,
how we're learning.
Am I becoming a more
loving human being?
wise human being?
Not is my life looking the same
way today as it did yesterday?
>> One of the things that
strikes so many people about
you is that in your lectures,
without that going into any
great detail, you are so
honest about your own life.
>> I spill the beans.
>> You do.
You spill the beans, Barbara.
And it's so authentic.
It's so appealing.
Do you ever leave a workshop and
think, oh, man, I went too far?
>> No.
I don't think I went too far.
>> That's great.
>> You know, it's interesting.
I grew up watching
a lot of teachers
who put themselves on pedestals,
who appeared to be perfect.
What I learned from that
was that it didn't give me
room to be imperfect.
It didn't give me room to grow.
>> Yeah.
>> And not as a device, but as
a way of keeping myself honest,
I decided a long time ago to
share my process with people.
And my process
has been dramatic.
It's been different.
It's been eventful.
>> Yes.
>> And for a reason.
I think when we
choose to be teachers,
and I mean consciously
choose before we
come into a life
to be teachers, we
take on a certain kind of karma.
I bet you some of the
people you've interviewed--
and I've talked to many of
them, cause they're my friends--
we, behind the scenes, agree
that most teachers did not
meet their high school
sweetheart at 19
and have lived for 40
years happily ever after.
>> I certainly did not.
>> They have had lives.
They have had stuff.
Because that's what's molded us.
That's the fire.
That's what's
given us and taught
us compassion for other people.
I've been through
so much in my life.
Very few things anyone
could ever tell me
I haven't experienced myself.
What that's taught
me is compassion.
I don't judge people
when I hear them.
I don't think, well,
I've been this.
So I don't understand
what your problem is.
And I think people
really appreciate that.
That's the one
comment I always hear
from people, which is your
honesty gives me permission
to love myself, no matter
what I'm going through.
So people will
challenge me, saying,
what gives you the right
to teach about this?
You've been married and
divorced all these times.
And I'll say, that's
exactly my credential.
That's my credential.
That's what I've taken on.
That's my sacrifice,
that I have taken on.
Let me have as many
experiences as possible.
Let me go through
as much as possible.
Because I'm not just
here for myself.
I'm here to teach.
>> I know you have to go.
But I do want to
say to you, I thank
you so much for sitting down
and chatting with us here
at Wisdom.
And having known you
for all these years,
it's very gratifying to me
to see that you are still,
from the first day I met
you, as much a truth seeker
as you are a truth teller.
Thank you, Barbara.
>> Thank you.
[MUSIC PLAYING]